====================
Meeting July 3, 2020
====================

- Discussion about the general effort, motivation behind bringing together different materials databases for a joint ontology.

  - A new ontology will (of course) not replace the application- and database-specific ontologies for each database, subdomain, application that people are working on.
  - A common ontology can work as a "point of commonality" to which these ontologies can relate; and as such works as a common ground to translate to-and-from to allow translation between other materials-science related ontologies.
  - The OPTIMADE effort has been helped by its singular, clear, expressed goal (a common API for materials databases). 
    It was suggested that this effort needs a similar well-expressed goal.
  - Having a practical view of the purpose of the work we do towards an ontology is important.
  - Is what we are developing an ontology? 
    What is an ontology? 
    It is a means for collaboration; the focus should be on the practicality for us (i.e., materials databases).
  - It would be useful to try to standardize (via schema) the *definitions* in the ontology, which usually is not done in ontologies.

- Definition of the entities `material` and `structure`.

  - There have been plenty of prior discussions, e.g., both in NOMAD and within OPTIMADE and for sure in relation to other ontologies.
  - There is a crystallographic view of what a `structure` is (i.e., mostly as represented in CIF), and it seems to align fairly well with how people in the materials field think about structures.
  - There is a level of arbitrariness in where the division between structure and materials goes.
  - Discussion about whether a point defect in an otherwise perfectly periodic crystal is a structure or something else.
    The crystallogaphic view is that defects are represented as widened peaks, are avereged out, etc.
    From a theoretical modelling perspective they are part of the concrete representation of "where atoms sit", which seems part of the structure.
  - A `material` is a very open concept with many degrees of freedom. 
    It can sometimes be related to a single structure or an ensemble of structures. 
    But, it can also be determined/defined by other models, e.g., for composites, metallic alloys, amorphous structures, quasicrystals, synthesis descriptions, etc.
  - Quasicrystals could be folded into the concept of `structure` by being described as "cut-outs" of periodic crystals in higher dimensions.
    There are similar structural models for amorphous materials.

  - The structure as a property?: To what degree can the structure just be seen as another property of a material? 

    - It can sometimes, and for some applications. 
      Are these two different realizations of the concept of `structure`?
    - A material *cannot* be a property; a clear difference between materials and structures.
    - When we talk about properties, properties are always in the context of some "of what?".
      If that "of what" is a structure, then that structure isn't a property. 
      But perhaps we should think of "of what" to be the *material*.

- Connection of this effort to EMMO

  - We can, for now, work under the vision of keeping the ontology connected to EMMO; as long as the restrictions are not limiting.
    A proposal is to try to work under the idea that we "connect" to EMMO at the `material` entity.
  - Some concerns about how the deeply philosophical nature and top-down approach of the EMMO influence/limit our work. 
    However, it is unclear if this actually provides concrete limitations.
  - Some limitations are imposed by the division into "physical things", "models", and "properties" (?), and their organization of relationships.

- Future directions

  - We try to setup monthly meetings for this effort. 
    Rickard will send out a doodle poll for a next meeting in early August.
  - A GitHub repository will be set up as a central point for the collaborative effort.
  - We will put some startup owl structure there with an initial attempt at `material` and `structure` entities based on what was discussed so far, meant to be improved.
  - We will keep an eye on the EMMO effort, and, in particular, the crystallography part that is presently a pull-request in their domain-crystallography repository.
