======================
Meeting March 10, 2021
======================

- With no invitee or particular dedicated topic, the discussion was broadly centered around the present state of the effort, our aims, and how to continue the effort.

- Use of "structure" vs. "crystal" (a discussion started last time, but cut short.)

  * This topic is related to if the 'single structure materials model' in our prototype ontology should be 'single crystal materials model.'

  * The underlying concept described by a crystal is something with an underlying periodicity.
    It may be non-periodic in the absolute sense due to defects, disorder, etc., but these are modifications onto a system where Bloch's theorem applies.

    - However, what about a quasicrystal, is that a crystal? In the semantic sense, yes, but model-wise, perhaps not.

  * The term "structure" is already used in a more broad sense, e.g., "Amorphous structure materials model." Hence, it is not a great word to select to specifically represent something with an underlying periodicity.

  * It makes sense to rename 'single structure materials model' to 'single crystal materials model.'

- How well are we coordinating with other ongoing efforts, in particular in the US?

  * The scheduling of these discussions has made them Europe-centric, but US databases are represented in OPTIMADE and, hopefully, informed about what is going on.

  * We should invite someone from NIST to the next meeting (and make sure they can participate).
    Rickard will reach out about this as we set up the poll for scheduling the next meeting.

  * Maybe likewise we should invite someone from the Royce institute in the UK, who are involved in similar work (https://www.royce.ac.uk/)

  * For the 'single crystal materials model' there is already an ongoing EMMO effort to create an ontology for crystallography trying to adhere to cif / the work of IUCr.
    It makes sense to coordinate with that effort.

- Restrictive vs. extensive ontology

  * Are we aiming for an ontology that keeps the concepts down to a minimum or aims to be an accurate model of all concepts used in relation to materials databases?

  * A good design could be a restricted core ontology + extensions, possibly targeting both aims.

  * Interesting parallel with database-specific extensions in OPTIMADE under separated namespaces.
    Can a similar strategy be devised here, where it is clear how the ontology is to be extended outside what is centrally standardized?

  * Discussion about differences and similarities with an OPTIMADE namespace-like extension mechanism vs. other standard ways of extending an ontology by importing it.

  * What is the point of making such extensions?

    - To map from application concepts to/from standardized concepts (needed, e.g., for data integration)

    - To utilize an extended ontology before concepts have been included in the standard.
      For example: to represent calculations based on a model that is not yet standardized.

  * What is special with this ontology for materials databases vs. existing ontologies in the domains of materials, materials science?
    Are we restricting ourselves to the domain of what is relevant for computational databases?

    - Supporting the applications we have in mind (ontology-supported databases, data integration, ...)

    - Not just for computations, but we are also trying to design with experimental data in mind by, e.g., with the materials synthesis model.

    - On the experimental side, we may need more input. 
      We may want to look at coordinating with, e.g., NREL and the effort of Volker Blum.

- Properties - how to add them to the ontology.
  Two fundamental views have come up before: (i) there is "something" and "the properties of something"; or (ii) everything is properties.

  * Our present prototype ontology is to a degree designed around "something" described by materials models.
    Adding a property entity to the ontology would take us to "the properties of something."
    Is this going to be limiting in comparison to an "everything is properties" view?
    Or does it allow greater flexibility?

  * Are we handling, e.g., processes of heat treatments of a material that changes its properties under such processes?

    - Arguably, the prototype ontology does - a material created via a number of process steps can be represented in, e.g., the synthesis model.

    - A measurement that is a process will likely be part of the description of that property.

    - But in a more general sense, there may be "processes" and "properties of processes" that cannot be described within a materials model + properties framework.

- Future / Agenda for the next meeting

  * We will coordinate around arranging an invitation of someone from NIST for the next meeting.

  * We want to start extending the prototype ontology more concretely.

    - For the 'single crystal materials model,' we are ready to designate a working group for a proposal on how to concretize this model.
      However, with the EMMO-related effort of a cif-based crystallography ontology with very similar aims, it makes sense to look into aligning these efforts.

    - The other relevant extensions of the prototype ontology right now are: (i) find a design for how to include properties; (ii) making the proposed materials models more concrete; (iii) adding missing models.

      * It would be good to more broadly discuss basic design alternatives for these before designating actual working groups and preparing proposals.

      * The proposed process is: everyone is encouraged to prototype a design of their interest.

      * These design prototypes are meant to be broad, high-level sketches, preferably considering multiple alternatives.
        In particular, the point is not yet developing them to a degree where one would get invested in a specific design.

      * The design prototype outlines are to be brought up at future meetings to discuss the merits and drawbacks.
        As we agree on designs, we will call for a working group to develop them into concrete proposals.

      * Design prototypes and proposals are welcome to be added to the ontology repository via pull-requests.

